Add support for more advanced `SlugInput` overrides with `locale` & `formatters` (#12598)
wagtail/wagtail: docs/advanced_topics/customization/page_editing_interface.md

        FieldPanel('body'),
    ]
```

(customizing_slug_widget)=

## Customizing Page slug generation

The `SlugInput` accepts additional kwargs or can be extended for custom slug generation.

Django's `models.SlugField` fields will automatically use the Wagtail admin's `SlugInput`, you will first need to override the widget.

```python
# ... imports

class MyPage(Page):
    promote_panels = [
        FieldPanel("slug"), # automatically uses `SlugInput`
        # ... other panels
    ]
```

### Overriding `SlugInput`

There are multiple ways to override the `SlugInput`, depending on your use case and admin setup.

#### Via `promote_panels`

> The simplest, if have already set custom `promote_panels` is to leverage the `FieldPanel` widget kwarg as follows.

Author: ```suggestion
The simplest, if have already set custom `promote_panels`, is to leverage the `FieldPanel` widget kwarg as follows.
```

class MyPage(Page):
    promote_panels = [
        FieldPanel("slug", widget=SlugInput(locale="uk-UK")), # force a specific locale for this page's slug only
        # ... other panels need to be declared
    ]
```

#### Via a custom form using `base_form_class`

If you do not want to re-declare the `promote_panels`, the `base_form_class` can reference a form class that sets the widget override.

```py
from wagtail.admin.forms import WagtailAdminPageForm
from wagtail.admin.widgets import SlugInput
from wagtail.models import Page
# ... other imports

class MyPageForm(WagtailAdminPageForm):

    def __init__(self, *args, **kwargs):
        super().__init__(*args, **kwargs)
        # force a specific locale for this page's slug only
        self.fields["slug"].widget = SlugInput(locale="uk-UK")

class MyPage(Page):
    base_form_class = MyPageForm
    # other fields
    # no need to declare `promote_panels`
```

#### Globally, via `register_form_field_override`

If you want to override the `models.SlugField` widget for the entire admin, this can be done using the Wagtail admin util.

It's best to add this to a `wagtail_hook.py` file as this will get run at the right time.

> ```py

Author: ```suggestion
```py
# wagtail_hooks.py
```

Add other file names in also.

from django.db import models
from wagtail.admin.forms.models import register_form_field_override
from wagtail.admin import widgets

# .. other imports & hooks

register_form_field_override(
    models.SlugField,
    override={"widget": widgets.SlugInput(locale="uk-UK")},
)
```

The following sections will only focus on the `SlugInput(...` usage and not where to override this.

### Overriding the default locale behavior via `locale`

> The `SlugInput` is locale aware and will adjust the transliteration (Unicode to ASCII conversion) based on the determined model locale, only when [`ALLOW_UNICODE_SLUGS`](wagtail_allow_unicode_slugs) is `False`.

Author: ```suggestion
The `SlugInput` is locale aware and will adjust the transliteration (Unicode to ASCII conversion) based on the most suitable locale, only when [`ALLOW_UNICODE_SLUGS`](wagtail_allow_unicode_slugs) is `False`.
```

> The locale will be determined from the target translation locale if ()[internationalisation] is enabled, or the current admin user's language if not.

Author: ```suggestion
The locale will be determined from the target translation locale if ()[internationalisation] is enabled. If Internationalization is not in use, it will be based on the language of the admin for the current logged in user. This can be overridden, see below.
```

| `SlugInput(locale="uk-UK")` or `SlugInput(locale="uk")` | Override the locale for a specific language code only (Ukrainian in this example)                                                                    |
| `SlugInput(locale=False)`                               | Avoid the default logic for determining the locale and do not attempt to be locale aware, transliteration will still apply but use a basic approach. |
| `SlugInput(locale=my_page_instance.locale)`             | Use a [`Locale`](locale_model_ref) instance from some other model source.                                                                            |

### Adding custom formatters via `formatters`

`SlugInput` also accepts a `formatters` kwarg, allowing a list of custom formatters to be applied, each formatter item can be one of the following.

1. A regex pattern or string (for example `r"\d"`, `re.compile(r"\d")`)
2. A list-like value containing a regex pattern/string and a replacement string (for example `[r"\d", "n"]`)
3. A list-like value containing a regex pattern/string and a replacement string & custom base JavaScript regex flags (for example `[r"\d", "n", "u"]`)

> A reminder to ensure that regex strings are appropriately escaped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a reminder, ensure that regex strings are appropriately escaped.
```

> As an example below, here's a formatter that will remove common stop words from the slug. If the title is entered as `The weather and the times`, this will produce a slug of `weather-times`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, here's a formatter that will remove common stop words from the slug. If the title is entered as `The weather and the times`, this will produce a slug of `weather-times`.
```

        FieldPanel('body'),
    ]
```

(customizing_slug_widget)=

## Customizing Page slug generation

The `SlugInput` widget accepts additional kwargs or can be extended for custom slug generation.

Django's `models.SlugField` fields will automatically use the Wagtail admin's `SlugInput`. To change its behavior you will first need to override the widget.

```python
# models.py

# ... imports

class MyPage(Page):
    promote_panels = [
        FieldPanel("slug"), # automatically uses `SlugInput`
        # ... other panels
    ]
```

### Overriding `SlugInput`

There are multiple ways to override the `SlugInput`, depending on your use case and admin setup.

#### Via `promote_panels`

> The simplest, if have already set custom `promote_panels`, is to leverage the `FieldPanel` widget kwarg as follows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The simplest, if you have already set custom `promote_panels`, is to leverage the `FieldPanel` widget kwarg as follows.
```

        # force a specific locale for this page's slug only
        self.fields["slug"].widget = SlugInput(locale="uk-UK")

class MyPage(Page):
    base_form_class = MyPageForm
    # other fields
    # no need to declare `promote_panels`
```

#### Globally, via `register_form_field_override`

If you want to override the `models.SlugField` widget for the entire admin, this can be done using the Wagtail admin util.

It's best to add this to a `wagtail_hooks.py` file as this will get run at the right time.

```py
# wagtail_hooks.py

from django.db import models
from wagtail.admin.forms.models import register_form_field_override
from wagtail.admin import widgets

# .. other imports & hooks

register_form_field_override(
    models.SlugField,
    override={"widget": widgets.SlugInput(locale="uk-UK")},
)
```

The following sections will only focus on the `SlugInput(...)` usage and not where to override this.

### Overriding the default locale behavior via `locale`

The `SlugInput` is locale aware and will adjust the transliteration (Unicode to ASCII conversion) based on the most suitable locale, only when [`ALLOW_UNICODE_SLUGS`](wagtail_allow_unicode_slugs) is `False`.

> The locale will be determined from the target translation locale if ()[internationalisation] is enabled.

Author: Thanks for this, it's interesting the CI didn't flag this bad link.
